Welcome to this video on clustering strategies in real-world applications.
After watching this video, you will be able to explain the concept of clustering and its
various applications.
You will learn how to apply k-means clustering to segment customers based on their characteristics.
Additionally, you will gain an understanding of the different types of clustering methods,
including partition-based, density-based, and hierarchical clustering.
Finally, you will be equipped to analyze agglomerative and divisive hierarchical clustering,
exploring their distinct approaches to grouping data points.
Clustering is a machine learning technique that automatically groups data points into
clusters based on similarities.
Clustering can be applied in various scenarios, such as identifying music genres,
segmenting user groups, or analyzing market segments.
This method can use just one feature or multiple features in data to form meaningful clusters.
This dataset includes historical customer features and loan default status.
Classification algorithms, being supervised, learn to predict categorical labels from labeled data.
Here, based on the labeled historical data, a decision tree model is trained to predict
if a new customer will default on a loan.
Clustering is like classification but works with unlabeled data,
independently finding patterns to form clusters.
Here, a k-means clustering model segments customers with similar characteristics into
three clusters, indicated by the blue, light blue, and red rows.
The model operates without knowing if a customer has defaulted, as that data is unavailable
and not part of its design.
In exploratory data analysis, clustering uncovers natural groupings, such as customer segmentation,
for targeted marketing.
Clustering boosts pattern recognition by grouping similar objects and aiding in image segmentation,
such as detecting medical abnormalities.
Clustering helps anomaly detection by identifying outliers and detecting fraud or equipment malfunctions.
In future engineering, clustering creates new features or reduces dimensionality,
improving model performance and interpretability.
In data summarization, clustering simplifies data by summarizing it
into a small number of representative clusters.
Clustering reduces data size by replacing data points with cluster centers,
which is useful for image compression.
Finally, clustering identifies essential features that distinguish clusters.
Partition-based clustering algorithms divide data into non-overlapping groups.
The most common method, k-means, identifies k-clusters with minimal variance.
These algorithms are efficient and scale well with large datasets.
Density-based clustering algorithms create clusters of any shape,
making them suitable for irregular clusters and noisy datasets.
An example is DBSCAN algorithm.
Hierarchical clustering algorithms organize data into a tree of nested clusters,
each containing smaller sub-clusters.
This process generates a dendrogram, revealing relationships between clusters.
The two main algorithms are agglomerative, which merges clusters,
and divisive, which splits them.
These algorithms are intuitive and effective for small to mid-sized datasets.
This partition-based clustering result uses the makeBlobs function from Scikit-learn,
generating three color-coded clusters in the scatterplot.
Here are two clustering results using the makeMoons function from Scikit-learn
that generates interlocking half-circles.
Both use color to distinguish clusters visually.
On the left, the partition-based clustering struggles to separate the shapes,
partitioning the data along a red curve.
In contrast, the density-based clustering successfully separates the shapes,
but creates an unnecessary third cluster of three points.
This chart, created by UCLA biologists, presents genetic data from over 900 dogs across
85 breeds and 200 wild grey wolves globally.
They analyzed 48,000 genetic markers using molecular techniques.
The diagram illustrates hierarchical clustering, grouping animals based on genetic similarities
in a tree-like structure, where each node represents a cluster of child clusters.
There are two main strategies for constructing hierarchical clustering trees, divisive and agglomerative.
Divisive clustering uses a top-down approach.
It starts with all observations in a single root cluster,
which is iteratively split into smaller child clusters.
Agglomerative clustering employs a bottom-up approach.
Each observation begins as an individual cluster,
and similar clusters are merged into larger parent clusters.
Let's explore the agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm,
which uses a bottom-up approach.
First, select a metric to measure the distance between clusters,
such as the distance between their centroids.
The process begins by initializing N clusters, with each cluster containing a single data point.
Next, a distance matrix is computed, which is an n-x-n matrix that displays the distances
d-i-j between each pair of points i and j.
Repeat the following steps until you achieve the desired number of clusters,
or merge all points into one cluster.
Merge the two closest clusters based on the selected distance metric.
Update the proximity metric with the new distance values.
Let's examine the divisive hierarchical clustering algorithm, which takes a top-down approach.
Start with the entire dataset as one cluster.
Partition this cluster into smaller clusters based on similarities or dissimilarities.
Continue splitting each cluster into two until a stopping criterion,
which is a minimum cluster size, is reached.
Imagine you want to group six cities in Canada based on their distances from one another.
The distance matrix represents the distances between each pair of cities.
The algorithm starts with six clusters, each representing a city with the first two letters
of its name.
The initial task is identifying which two clusters to merge based on a distance measure,
like flight distance.
Reviewing the distance matrix shows that Montreal and Ottawa are the closest clusters,
so they combine into the next parent cluster.
As the algorithm progresses, you can visualize the hierarchy of clusters with a dendrogram,
as indicated by the red oval.
The distance matrix combines the rows and columns for Montreal and Ottawa
in the Ottawa-Montreal cluster.
The distances to this new cluster are updated and calculated as the midpoint between the
two cities.
Next, look for the closest clusters again.
The Ottawa-Montreal and Toronto clusters are the nearest,
forming the Toronto-Ottawa-Montreal cluster.
As the algorithm progresses, a dendrogram visualizes the hierarchy of clusters,
as shown by the red oval.
Next, the updated distance matrix shows that Vancouver and Edmonton are the closest.
Similarly, the agglomerative algorithm merges clusters into one, completing the dendrogram.
In this video, you learned to
explain the concept of clustering and its applications,
apply k-means clustering to segment customers based on characteristics.
Explain density-based clustering and how they are suitable for irregular clusters.
Explain hierarchical clustering and how it generates a dendrogram.
Use strategies for hierarchical clustering, divisive and agglomerative.
Analyze agglomerative hierarchical clustering and its bottom-up approach.
Analyze divisive hierarchical clustering and its top-up approach.